## Order of an element

Suppose $G = <a>$. Then, a typical element of $G$ is of the form $a^{k}$ where $k \in \mathbb{Z}$.

### Infinite Order Element

If $ord(a)$ is not finite, then $G$ is isomorphic to $\mathbb{Z}$. In this case, any non-identity element has **infinite** order.

So, now suppose $ord(a) =m$, where $m$ is a positive integer. Suppose $k$ is positive. We consider the sequence:
$a^{k},a^{2k},a^{3k},\dots$
The first time $1$ will occur in this sequence at $a^{kd}$, where $kd$ is the smallest multiple of $k$ which is also a multiple of $m$. So, $kd=lcm(k,m)$

Recall: $k.m=gcd(k,m).lcm(k,m)$
So we can see that:
$$
\begin{align}
ord(a^{k})=d &=\frac{lcm(k,m)}{k} \\
&= \frac{m}{gcd(k,m)}
\end{align}
$$
If $k$ is negative, we can apply this argument to $-k$ to get 
$ord(a^{-k})=\frac{m}{gcd(-k,m)}$
However, $ord(a^{k})=ord(a^{-k})$
and $gcd(k,m)=gcd(-k,m)$
So, $ord(a^{k})=\frac{m}{gcd(k,m)}$
We have proved:
Theorem 1: Suppose $G=<a>$ and $ord(a)=m$, where $m \in \mathbb{Z}$. Then, $ord(a^{k})=\frac{m}{gcd(k,m)}$ for any integer $k$.

Note that for any element $x$ of a group, $|<x>|=ord(x)$. So we have:
**Corollary 1**: Under the above hypothesis, $|<a^{k}>|=\frac{m}{gcd(k,m)}$
**Corollary 2**: Under the above hypothesis, $a^{k}$ is a generator of $G=<a>$ if and only if $gcd(k,m)=1$,i.e. $\bar{k} \in U(m)$

More generally, we see that $a^{k}$ and $a^{l}$ have the same order $\iff$ $gcd(k,m)=gcd(l,m)$. Now, for a fixed integer $k$, let $d=gcd(k,m)$. So, $ord(a^{d})=ord(a^{k})=m/d$.
So, $|<a^{d}>|=m/d$
However, we also see that $a^{k}=(a^{d})^{k/d}$ is an element of $<a^{d}>$.
As $ord(a^{k})=m/d=|<a^{d}>|$,
we see that $a^{k}$ generates the subgroup $<a^{d}>$. So we have proved that:
Suppose $G = <a>$ with $ord(a)=m \in \mathbb{Z}$. Then, for any $k \in \mathbb{Z}$, $<a^{k}>=<a^{gcd(k,m)}>$

Now, let $d$ be any divisor of $m$. Then, $<a^{d}>$ is a group of order $m/d$. On the other hand, if $k$ is any integer, the subgroup $<a^{k}>$ has order $m/d$ if and only if $d=gcd(k,m)$.
Theorem 2 thus shows that in that case $<a^{k}>=<a^{d}>$. Thus we have proved:

**Corollary 3**: Under the above hypothesis, for any divisor $d$ of $m$, $G$ has a unique *cyclic subgroup* of order $m/d$. It is generated by $a^{d}$. We have proved that if $ord(a)$ is infinite (i.e. if $G$ is isomorphic to $\mathbb{Z}$), then any subgroup of $G= <a>$ is cyclic.

### Finite Order Element

**Theorem 3**:
Suppose $G= <a>$ with $ord(a) =m \in \mathbb{Z}$. Then, every subgroup of $G$ is cyclic.

*Proof*:
$G=\{ 1,a,a^{2},\dots,a^{m-1} \}$
Let $H$ be a subgroup of $G$. Suppose $H \neq \{ 1 \}$
Let $t=$ smallest positive integer such that $t <m$ and $a^{t} \in H$.

We claim that $H=<a^{t}>$. Indeed let $a^{s}$ be in $H$. Write $s=tq+r$, where $q,r \in \mathbb{Z}$ and $0 \leq r < t$.
Then, $a^{r}=a^{s}.a^{-tq} \text{ } \in H$. But by choice of $t$, this is possible only if $r=0$. Thus $a^{s}\in <a^{t}>$.
Thus, $H \subseteq <a^{t}>$, we conclude that $H=<a^{t}>$

## The group $U(m)$ and Euler's function

For any positive integer $m$ we define $\phi(m)=|U(m)|$. Thus $\phi(m)=$ number of integers $k$ such that $0 \leq k< m$ and $gcd(m,k)=1$

```ad-note
title: Easy Examples
color: 0,100,255
icon: infinity

- If $p$ is a prime number, $\phi(p)=p-1$
- If $p$ is a prime number and $k$ is a positive integer, $\phi(p^{k})=p^{k}-p^{k-1}$. Number of integers $\leq p^{k}$ which are divisible by $p$
```

### Theorem 4

Let $m,n$ be positive integers such that $gcd(m,n)=1$. Then $\phi(mn)=\phi(m)\phi(n)$.

**Proof:**
Let $r,s$ be integers such that $mr+ns=1$. We will define a function $f: U(m) \times U(n) \to U(mn)$. Let $\bar{a} \in U(m), \bar{b} \in U(n)$.
Define:
$f(\bar{a},\bar{b})=\bar{x} \text{ } \in \mathbb{Z}/mn\mathbb{Z}$, where $x=ans+bmr$
Recall that $gcd(m,a)=1$ and $gcd(m,n)=1$ by hypothesis. As $mr+ns=1$, we also have $gcd(m,s)=1$.
So, $gcd(m,ans)=1$
So, $gcd(m,ans+bmr)=1$
i.e. $gcd(m,x)=1$
A similar argument shows $gcd(n,x)=1$.
So $gcd(mn,x)=1$, i.e. $\bar{x} \in U(mn)$

We need to check that $f$ is well-defined, i.e. we need to see that $\bar{x}=\overline{ans+bmr}$ does not change if we replace a and b by some elements of $\bar{a}=a+m\mathbb{Z}$ and $\bar{ b}=b=n\mathbb{Z}$ respectively.
Suppose $a_{1}\equiv a \text{ }mod(m)$
and $b_{1}\equiv b \text{ } mod(n)$
Let $x_{1}=a_{1}ns+b_{1}mr$
We see that $m|a_{1}s-as=(a_{1}-a)s$
and so, $mn|a_{1}ns-ans$.
Similarly, $mn|b_{1}mr-bmr$.
So, $mn|(a_{1}ns+b_{1}mr)-(ans+bmr)=x_{1}-x$
So, $x_{1}\equiv x \text{ } mod(mn)$, i.e. $\bar{x_{1}}=\bar{x}$
Thus, $f$ is well defined.

Claim 1:
$f$ is $1-1$. Indeed, suppose $f(\bar{a_{1}},\bar{b_{1}})=f(\bar{a_{2}},\bar{b_{2}})$.
Then $mn|(a_{1}ns+bmr)-(a_{2}ns+b_{2}mr)$
  $(a_{1}ns+b_{1}mr)-(a_{2}ns+b_{2}mr)$
$=ns(a_{1}-a_{2})+mr(b_{1}-b_{2})$
If $m$ divides this expression, $m|ns(a_{1}-a_{2})$. But $gcd(m,ns)=1\implies m|a_{1}-a_{2}$ i.e. $\bar{a_{1}}=\bar{a_{2}}$. Similarly, $\bar{b_{1}}=\bar{b_{2}}$.
So, $f$ is a $1-1$ function.

Claim 2:
$f$ is onto.
Let $\bar{x} \in U(mn)$. Then $gcd(x,mn)=1 \implies gcd(x,m)=1$ and $gcd(x,n)=1$. So $(x+m\mathbb{Z}) \in U(m)$ and $(x+n\mathbb{Z}) \in U(n)$

What is $f(x+m\mathbb{Z}, x+n\mathbb{Z})$
$xns+xmr=x(ns+mr)=x.1=x$
So, $f(x+m\mathbb{Z},x+n\mathbb{Z})=x+mn\mathbb{Z}$ i.e. $\bar{x}$. Thus, $f$ is onto.

This shows that $f: U(m) \times U(n)\to U(mn)$ is a $1-1$ correspondence.
Thus, $\phi(mn)=\phi(m).\phi(n)$

#### Example:
$$
\begin{align}
\phi(300) &= \phi(2^{2}.3.5^{2}) \\
&= \phi(2^{2}).\phi(3).\phi(5^{2}) \\
&= (2^{2}-2).(3^{1}-3^{0}).(5^{2}-5) \\
&= 2.2.20 \\
&= 80
\end{align}
$$
### Theorem 5
Let $m$ be a positive integer. Let $a \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $gcd(a,m)=1$. Then, $a^{\phi(m)}\equiv1 \text{ } mod(m)$

**Proof:**
Thus, $ord(\bar{a})/|U(m)|=\phi(m)$
So, $\bar{a}^{\phi(m)}=\bar{1}$, i.e. $a^{\phi(m)}\equiv 1 \text{ } mod(m)$.
